Call for testing of traingulation backend (#9)
napari/island-dispatch: source/blog/triangles_speedup_beta.md

[Vispy](https://vispy.org), which powers napari's graphics, uses OpenGL to draw
on the screen. The fundamental unit of OpenGL graphics is *triangles*, which
can be put together to draw more complex shapes such as polygons. This means
that we have a preproprocessing step in napari to break down input shapes into
triangles. This step is called *triangulation*.

Until now, we have been using an algorithm called Constrained Delaunay
Triangulation
([1](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01553881),[2](https://www.cs.jhu.edu/~misha/Spring16/Chew87.pdf)),
implemented in pure Python in Vispy. This has been a performance bottleneck
when creating Shapes layers with thousands to hundreds of thousands of shapes.
(An optional dependency [`triangle`](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~quake/triangle.html)
can be used to speed things up, but because it uses a proprietary license, we
cannot ship it by default and we cannot use it in the napari bundled app.)

Thanks to the [SpatialData](https://spatialdata.scverse.org/) community, which
decided to sponsor this work, we were able to implement a faster algorithm for
rendering triangles used for rendering geometries in a napari shapes layer.

> (`SpatialData` is a framework for the representation of spatial multimodal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(`SpatialData` is a framework for the representation of spatial multimodal omics
```

---
blogpost: true
date: December 22, 2024
author: Grzegorz Bokota
location: World
category: Advertisement
language: English
---

# Triangles Speedup – call for beta testers

We are excited to announce that significant performance improvements are coming to napari shapes layers. 

Thanks to SpatialData community, that decided to sponsor this work, we were able to implement faster algorithm for rendering triangles. 

> Before this change we are using Constrained Delaunay Triangulation ([1](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01553881),[2](https://www.cs.jhu.edu/~misha/Spring16/Chew87.pdf)) to render triangles from [vispy](https://vispy.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before this change we were using Constrained Delaunay Triangulation ([1](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01553881),[2](https://www.cs.jhu.edu/~misha/Spring16/Chew87.pdf)) to render triangles from [vispy](https://vispy.org/).
```

> This algorithm is iterative. As vispy implement it in Python, it is not as fast as it could be. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This algorithm is iterative. As vispy is implemented in Python, it is not as fast as it could be. 
```

> Te have tested the new implementation on a few datasets, and we see significant speedup. For example, on `cell_boundaries` from `xenium2.0.0_io` that constains 162k polygons,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have tested the new implementation on a few example datasets of SpatialData, and we see a significant speedup. For example, for `cell_boundaries` from `xenium2.0.0_io` which contains 162k polygons,
```

> we observed that creation of the shapes layer drop from 3:52 (napari 0.4.19) to 0:20 on Ubuntu 20.04 with Intel Core i7-8700 CPU @ 3.20GHz.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we observed that creation of the shapes layer drops from 3:52 (napari 0.4.19) to 0:20 on Ubuntu 20.04 with Intel Core i7-8700 CPU @ 3.20GHz.
```

> Where most of the time was spent on triangulation, and now it takes around 2.5s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the time of creating the shapes layer was spent on triangulation, which takes 2.5s with the latest changes.
```

> We decided that we need to implement algorithm in compiled language. For create prototype we choose C++.
> We have decided to implement sweeping line triangulation algorithm ([3](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-77974-2)).
> This algorithm will allow us in future to implement support of holes in polygons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The speedup was achieved by implementing the sweeping line triangulation algorithm ([3](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-77974-2)) in a compiled language. For the initial prototype we choose C++. The algorithm will allow us in future to implement support of holes in polygons.
```

Reviewer 2: I can't suggest to a suggestion, but I'd go with `...implement support for polygons with holes.`

> The prototype is implemented in `PartSegCore-compiled-backend`, the package maintained by one of core developer of napari.
> During testing we observed, that sometimes algorithm crash because of floating point precision. 
> So we need to fix part of code choosing equivalent, but more floating point precision resistant solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The prototype is implemented in `PartSegCore-compiled-backend`, a package maintained by Grzegorz Bokota, a core developer of napari.
During testing we observed, that sometimes the algorithm crashes because of [floating point precision](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/why-floating-point-numbers-may-lose-precision?view=msvc-170). 
In order to address this we require equivalent, but more floating point precision resistant solutions.
```
I think you are allowed to credit yourself here:) Also thought to add a link to a page explaining a bit more about floating point precision errors.

> Current plan is to create `bermuda` package, that will contain compiled backend for napari shapes layer.
> Based on some tests, the usage of rust may produce even faster code ([4](https://github.com/napari/bermuda/pull/1))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the future we plan to create the `bermuda` package (yes, because of the Bermuda triangle), that will contain the compiled backend for napari shapes layer.
Some testing showed that the usage of rust may produce even faster code ([4](https://github.com/napari/bermuda/pull/1))
```

> It may happen that we do not found all bugs and problems with floating point calculations, so we are looking for beta testers.
> When we are working to make it stable, you could test if it works for you. If not we will be happy to get feedback from you. If you could provide us with dataset that cause problems, it will be even better, as we could add problematic cases to tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may happen that we did not find all bugs and problems with floating point calculations, so we are looking for beta testers.
To help make it stable, you could test if it works for you. If not, we would be happy to get your feedback by reporting any problems in a [github issue](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues) or at a [napari community meeting](https://napari.org/dev/community/meeting_schedule.html). If you could provide us with a dataset that causes problems, it will be even better, as it allows us to add problematic cases to tests.
```

## How to test it

> If napari 0.4.6 is not released yet, you can install it from source:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If napari 0.5.6 is not released yet, you can install it from source:
```
Don't forget to update this section or remove it if it has been released.

Reviewer 2: Yeah this should be updated for 0.5.6 I think, so `napari[all]` or `napari[optional]`

Author: May you check it now?

```bash
pip install git+https://github.com/napari/napari.git
pip install PartSegCore-compiled-backend
``` 
otherwise you can install it from pypi:

```bash
pip install napari PartSegCore-compiled-backend
```

> Then open napari, then open File → Preferences → Experimental and enable "Use compiled backend to speedup create/update of Shapes layer"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then open napari, and open the menu File → Preferences → Experimental and enable "Use compiled backend to speedup create/update of Shapes layer"
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(You don't need to restart napari, just create a new Shapes layer after toggling the setting.)
```

![Experimental settings](images/speedup_triangulate_shapes.png)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

You can also toggle it using the `COMPILED_TRIANGULATION` environment variable, for example activating it and launching `napari` using `COMPILED_TRIANGULATION=1 napari`.
```

During testing we observed, that sometimes the algorithm crashes because of [floating point precision](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/why-floating-point-numbers-may-lose-precision?view=msvc-170). 
In order to address this we require equivalent, but more floating point precision resistant solutions.

In the future we plan to create the `bermuda` package (yes, because of the Bermuda triangle), that will contain the compiled backend for napari shapes layer.
Some testing showed that the usage of rust may produce even faster code ([4](https://github.com/napari/bermuda/pull/1))

It may happen that we did not find all bugs and problems with floating point calculations, so we are looking for beta testers.
To help make it stable, you could test if it works for you. If not, we would be happy to get your feedback by reporting any problems in a [github issue](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues) or at a [napari community meeting](https://napari.org/dev/community/meeting_schedule.html). If you could provide us with a dataset that causes problems, it will be even better, as it allows us to add problematic cases to tests.

## How to test it

> This feature requires napari in version at least 0.4.6. At moment of publishin this annoucement the firt pre-release of napri is avialable. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This feature requires napari in version at least 0.5.6. At moment of publishing this announcement, the first pre-release of napari 0.5.6 is available on PyPI. 
```

If napari 0.4.6 is not released yet, you can install pre-release:

```bash
pip install --pre napari
pip install PartSegCore-compiled-backend
``` 
otherwise you can install it from pypi:

```bash

> pip install napari PartSegCore-compiled-backend

Reviewer 2: should we use [optional] and a qt backend? or just use napari[all]

Author: ```suggestion
pip install --pre napari[optional,pyqt6]
pip install PartSegCore-compiled-backend
``` 
otherwise you can install it from pypi:

```bash
pip install napari[optional,pyqt6] PartSegCore-compiled-backend
```

```

> Then open napari, and open the menu File → Preferences → Experimental and enable "Use compiled backend to speedup create/update of Shapes layer"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then open napari, and open the menu File → Preferences → Experimental and enable "Use compiled backend to speedup create/update of Shapes layer".
```

This feature requires napari in version at least 0.5.6. At moment of publishing this announcement, the first pre-release of napari 0.5.6 is available on PyPI. 

If napari 0.5.6 is not released yet, you can install the pre-release using `pip`:

```bash
pip install --pre napari[optional,pyqt6]
pip install PartSegCore-compiled-backend
``` 
otherwise you can install it from pypi:

```bash
pip install napari[optional,pyqt6] PartSegCore-compiled-backend
```

Then open napari, and open the menu File → Preferences → Experimental and enable "Use compiled backend to speedup create/update of Shapes layer".
(You don't need to restart napari, just create a new Shapes layer after toggling the setting.)
![Experimental settings](images/speedup_triangulate_shapes.png)

You can also toggle it using the `COMPILED_TRIANGULATION` environment variable, for example activating it and launching `napari` using `COMPILED_TRIANGULATION=1 napari`.
If you spot any issues you may report them on [napari zulip](https://napari.zulipchat.com/), or create issue on [bermuda github](https:/github.com/bermuda/napari/issues).

Once we release the `bermuda` we will add proper installation instruction to this post.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

## Editing layer

Ths job not (yet) improve code responsible for slownes of editing Shapes layer with a huge number of polygons.

```
